r 22 years the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) has 
supported the State Court Processing Statistics (SCPS) 
project—a statistical series describing the characteristics 
of felony defendants and the processing of their cases 
by state courts. The SCPS data are routinely used by 
pretrial practitioners, bail bondsmen, criminal justice 
policymakers, district attorneys, state courts, lawmakers, 
academics, journalists, and members of the public. 
Inherent in the SCPS design are a number of limitations 
in the uses and capabilities of these data. In particular, the 
following limitations must be considered when analyzing 
SCPS data, drawing any conclusions based on the data, 
and citing BJS reports.
Background
SCPS data are insufficient to explain causal 
associations between the patterns reported.
BJS reports and analyses describe patterns associated 
with case processing, such as misconduct during pretrial 
release. However, the data are insufficient to explain 
causal associations between the patterns reported, such as 
the efficacy of one form of pretrial release over another. 
To understand whether one form of pretrial release is 
more effective than others, it would be necessary to 
collect information relevant to the pretrial release decision 
and factors associated with individual misconduct. 
Some of the relevant factors include a defendant’s 
community ties, employment status, income, educational 
background, drug abuse history, and mental health status. 
For reasons related to cost and data accessibility, these 
measures are not currently collected in SCPS. 
Evaluative statements about the effectiveness 
of a particular program in preventing pretrial 
misconduct may be misleading. 
BJS does not support the use of SCPS data for such 
evaluative statements. Detailed measures of pretrial 
monitoring practices are critical to any evaluation of 
the efficacy of a pretrial release program. SCPS does 
not have the capacity to distinguish highly functioning 
pretrial diversionary programs from those operating 
under limited staffing and budgetary constraints. Also, 
SCPS cannot distinguish defendants released under 
conditions that involve intensive pretrial monitoring 
from defendants released under less stringent pretrial 
conditions. Any evaluative statement about the 
effectiveness of a particular program in preventing pretrial 
misconduct based on SCPS is misleading. BJS does not 
support such use of these data.
The potential for misconduct is only one of many 
factors that jurisdictions consider in developing 
and implementing pretrial release policies.
Many complex issues are involved in determining 
a jurisdiction’s policy for release or detention of the 
criminally accused and the best method for releasing 
defendants. State and local officials consider an array of 
interrelated factors when developing and implementing 
pretrial release policies, including jail overcrowding, 
pretrial incarceration of individuals accused of minor 
offenses, the utility of pretrial risk assessments, and the 
capacity of pretrial diversion programs. BJS reports and 
SCPS data, as currently collected, cannot be used to 
evaluate such factors.
